Tutorial for cats-effect (#362)
typelevel/cats-effect: site/src/main/tut/tutorial/tutorial.md

should first get the first stream with one `bracket` call, and then the second
stream with another `bracket` call inside the first. But, in a way, that's
precisely what we do when we `flatMap` instances of `Resource`. And code looks
cleaner too :) .  So, while `bracket` has its usage, when using several
resources at once it is likely a better choice using `Resource` to handle them.

### Copying data 
Finally we have our streams ready to go! We have to focus now on coding
`transfer`. That function will have to define a loop that at each iteration
reads data from the input stream into a buffer, and then writes the buffer
contents into the output stream. At the same time, the loop will keep a counter
of the bytes transferred. To reuse the same buffer we should define it outside
the main loop, and leave the actual transmission of data to another function
`transmit` that uses that loop. Something like:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import cats.implicits._ 
import java.io._ 

def transmit(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream, buffer: Array[Byte], acc: Long): IO[Long] =
  for {
    amount <- IO(origin.read(buffer, 0, buffer.size))

>     count  <- if(amount > -1) IO(destination.write(buffer, 0, amount)) *> transmit(origin, destination, buffer, acc + amount)

Author: I switch to `>>`, as it also fits better the explanation I added to the text.

            }
  } yield ()
```

The loop tries to read a line from the client, and if successful then it checks
the line content. If empty it finishes the method, if not it sends back the
line through the writer and loops back to the beginning. And what happens if we
find any error in the `reader.readLine()` call? Well, `IO` will catch the
exception and will short-circuit the evaluation, this method would then return
an `IO` instance carrying the caught exception. Easy, right :) ?

So we are done with our `echoProtocol` method, good! But we still miss the part
of our server that will list for new connections and create fibers to attend
them. Let's work on that, we implement that functionality in another method
that takes as input the `java.io.ServerSocket` instance that will listen for
clients:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import java.net.{ServerSocket, Socket}
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

// echoProtocol as defined before
def echoProtocol(clientSocket: Socket): IO[Unit] = ???

def serve(serverSocket: ServerSocket): IO[Unit] = {
  def close(socket: Socket): IO[Unit] = 
    IO(socket.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)

>   implicit val contextShift = IO.contextShift(global)

Author: In fact I only included those so the reader can copy&paste the code snippet to the `sbt` console without errors. But it's true that passing `ContextShift` as implicit parameter the code still compiles and the import is not needed. Cool! :+1:

So we will 'block' by reading our `MVar` instance, and only writing when `STOP`
is received, the write being the _signal_ that the server must be shut down. The
server will be only stopped once, so we are not concerned about blocking on
writing.

And who shall signal that the server must be stopped? In this example, we will
assume that it will be the connected users who can request the server to halt by
sendind a `STOP` message. Thus, the method attending clients (`echoProtocol`!)
needs access to the flag to use it to communicate that the stop must stop when
that message is received.

Let's first define a new method `server` that instantiates the flag, runs the
`serve` method in its own fiber and waits on the flag to be set. Only when
the flag is set the server fiber will be cancelled.

```scala
import cats.effect._
import cats.effect.concurrent.MVar
import java.net.ServerSocket
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

// serve now requires access to the stopFlag, it will use it to signal the
// server must stop
def serve(serverSocket: ServerSocket, stopFlag: MVar[IO, Unit]): IO[Unit] = ???

def server(serverSocket: ServerSocket): IO[ExitCode] = {

>   implicit val contextShift = IO.contextShift(global)

Reviewer: As earlier, I believe it should be passed as parameter

available](https://github.com/lrodero/cats-effect-tutorial/blob/master/src/main/scala/catsEffectTutorial/EchoServerV3_ClosingClientsOnShutdown).

### `Fiber`s are not threads!<a name="fibers-are-not-threads"></a>

As stated before, fibers are like 'light' threads, meaning they can be used in a
similar way than threads to create concurrent code. However, they are _not_
threads. Spawning new fibers does not guarantee that the action described in the
`IO` associated to it will be run... immediately. At the end of the day, if no
thread is available that can run the fiber, then the actions in that fiber will
be blocked until some thread is available.

You can test this yourself. Start the server defined in the previous sections
and try to connect several clients and send lines to the server through them.
Soon you will notice that the latest clients... do not get any echo reply when
sending lines! Why is that?  Well, the answer is that the first fibers already
used all _underlying_ threads available!  But if we close one of the active
clients by sending an empty line (recall that makes the server to close that
client session) then immediately one of the blocked clients will be active.

> It shall be clear from that experiment than fibers are run by thread pools. And

Reviewer: > than fiber are..

typo

Cats-effect provides ways to use different `scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext`s,
each one with its own thread pool, and to swap which one should be used for each
new `IO` to ask to reschedule threads among the current active `IO` instances
_e.g._ for improved fairness etc. Such functionality is provided by `IO.shift`.
Also, it even allows to 'swap' to different `Timer`s (that is, different thread
pools) when running `IO` actions. See this code, which is mostly a copy example
available at [IO documentation in cats-effect web, Thread Shifting
section](https://typelevel.org/cats-effect/datatypes/io.html#thread-shifting):

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import java.util.concurrent.Executors
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

val cachedThreadPool = Executors.newCachedThreadPool()
val clientsExecutionContext = ExecutionContext.fromExecutor(cachedThreadPool)
implicit val contextShift = IO.contextShift(global) 

for {
  _ <- IO.shift(clientsExecutionContext) // Swapping to cached thread pool
  _ <- IO(???) // Whatever is done here, is done by a thread from the cached thread pool

>   _ <- IO.shift // Swapping back to default timer

Reviewer: Timer is no longer responsible for shifts so perhaps "to default thread pool" ?

shutting down the thread pool when the server finishes:

```scala
import cats.effect._
import cats.effect.concurrent.MVar
import cats.implicits._
import java.net.ServerSocket
import java.util.concurrent.Executors
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

def serve(serverSocket: ServerSocket, stopFlag: MVar[IO, Unit])(implicit clientsExecutionContext: ExecutionContext): IO[Unit] = ???

def server(serverSocket: ServerSocket): IO[ExitCode] = {

  val clientsThreadPool = Executors.newCachedThreadPool()
  implicit val clientsExecutionContext = ExecutionContext.fromExecutor(clientsThreadPool)
  implicit val contextShift = IO.contextShift(global)

  for {
    stopFlag     <- MVar[IO].empty[Unit]
    serverFiber  <- serve(serverSocket, stopFlag).start
    _            <- stopFlag.read *> IO{println(s"Stopping server")}
    _            <- IO{clientsThreadPool.shutdown()}
    _            <- serverFiber.cancel
  } yield ExitCode.Success

}
```

Signatures of `serve` and of `echoProtocol` will have to be changed too to pass
the execution context as parameter. The [resulting server code is available

> here](https://github.com/lrodero/cats-effect-tutorial/blob/master/src/main/scala/catsEffectTutorial/EchoServerV4_ClientThreadPool).

Reviewer: broken link, I think it's missing `.scala` at the end

modelled with `Future`s so they do not block the calling thread. When defining
our `IO`, should we block on the `Future` waiting for the result? No! We can
wrap the call in an `async` call like:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global
import scala.concurrent.Future
import scala.util._

trait Service { def getSomething(): Future[String] }
def service: Service = ???

IO.async[String]{ (cb: Either[Throwable, String] => Unit) => 
  service.getSomething().onComplete {
    case Success(s) => cb(Right(s))
    case Failure(e) => cb(Left(e))
  }
}
```

So, let's say our new goal is to create an echo server that does not require a
thread per connected socket to wait on the blocking `read()` method. If we use a
network library that avoids or at limits blocking operations, we could then
combine that with `async` to create such non-blocking server. And Java NIO can
be helpful here. While Java NIO does have some blocking method (`Selector`'s
`select()`), it allows to build servers that do not require a thread per
connected client: `select()` will return those 'channels' (such as

> `SochetChannel`) that have data available to read from, then processing of the

Reviewer: > SochetChannel

typo

        (IO(in.close()), IO(out.close()))
        .tupled              // From (IO[Unit], IO[Unit]) to IO[(Unit, Unit)]
        .handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit).void
    }
}
```

New `copy` definition is more complex, still code as a whole is way shorter as
we do not need the `inputOutputStreams` function. But there is a catch in the
code above.  When using `bracket`, if there is a problem when getting resources
in the first stage, then the release stage will not be run. Now, in the code
above, first the origin file and then the destination file are opened (`tupled`
just reorganizes both `IO` instances into a single one). So what would happen if
we successfully open the origin file (_i.e._ when evaluating `inIO`) but then an
exception is raised when opening the destination file (_i.e._ when evaluating
`outIO`)? In that case the origin stream will not be closed! To solve this we
should first get the first stream with one `bracket` call, and then the second
stream with another `bracket` call inside the first. But, in a way, that's
precisely what we do when we `flatMap` instances of `Resource`. And code looks
cleaner too :) .  So, while `bracket` has its usage, when using several

> resources at once it is likely a better choice using `Resource` to handle them.

Author: Regarding the suggestion to replace `*>` with `>>`, I honestly thought that `*>` was as safe as `>>`. I'm learning a lot :) .

> resources at once it is likely a better choice using `Resource` to handle them.

Reviewer: @lrodero the difference is that `*>` is defined in terms of `map2` which takes both arguments by-value (eager evaluation) and `>>` evaluates second argument lazily so the former can stack overflow with recursion like `val repeat = IO(1) *> repeat`. :)

`transmit` that uses that loop. Something like:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import cats.implicits._ 
import java.io._ 

def transmit(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream, buffer: Array[Byte], acc: Long): IO[Long] =
  for {
    amount <- IO(origin.read(buffer, 0, buffer.size))
    count  <- if(amount > -1) IO(destination.write(buffer, 0, amount)) *> transmit(origin, destination, buffer, acc + amount)
              else IO.pure(acc) // End of read stream reached (by java.io.InputStream contract), nothing to write
  } yield count // Returns the actual amount of bytes transmitted

def transfer(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream): IO[Long] =
  for {
    buffer <- IO(new Array[Byte](1024 * 10)) // Allocated only when the IO is evaluated
    total  <- transmit(origin, destination, buffer, 0L)
  } yield total
```

Take a look to `transmit`, observe that both input and output actions are
encapsulated in their own `IO` instances. Being `IO` a monad, we can sequence
them using a for-comprehension to create another `IO`. The for-comprehension
loops as long as the call to `read()` does not return a negative value that

> would signal the end of the stream has been reached. `*>` is a Cats operator to

Author: I'm changing it to use `>>` (thanks for the suggestion!)... but I feel inclined to keep the comment about `IO` being stack-safe, if not readers unfamiliar with `IO` capabilities can assume the code above is just ignoring such hazard.

sequence two operations where the output of the first is not needed by the
second, _i.e._ it is equivalent to `first.flatMap(_ => second)`). In the code
above that means that after each write operation we recursively call `transmit`
again, but as `IO` is stack safe we are not concerned about stack overflow
issues. At each iteration we increase the counter `acc` with the amount of bytes
read at that iteration. 

We are making progress, and already have a version of `copy` that can be used.
If any exception is raised when `transfer` is running, then the streams will be
automatically closed by `Resource`. But there is something else we have to take
into account: `IO` instances execution can be **_cancelled!_**. And cancellation
should not be ignored, as it is a key feature of cats-effect. We will discuss
cancellation in the next section.

### Dealing with cancellation

> Cancellation is a cats-effect feature, powerful but non trivial. In cats-effect,

Author: :wink: changing it!

case we will use a
[_semaphore_](../concurrency/semaphore.html). A
semaphore has a number of permits, its method `acquire` 'blocks' if no permit is
available until `release` is called on the same semaphore. It is important to
remark that _there is no actual thread being really blocked_, the thread that
finds the `acquire` will be immediately recycled by cats-effect. When the
`release` method is invoked then cats-effect will look for some available thread
to resume the execution of the code after `acquire`.

We will use a semaphore with a single permit, along with a new function `close`
that will close the stream, defined outside `copy` for the sake of readability:

```scala
import cats.implicits._
import cats.effect.{ContextShift, IO, Resource}
import cats.effect.concurrent.Semaphore
import java.io._

// transfer and transmit methods as defined before
def transfer(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream): IO[Long] = ???

def inputStream(f: File, guard: Semaphore[IO]): Resource[IO, FileInputStream] =
  Resource.make {
    IO(new FileInputStream(f))
  } { inStream => 
    for  {
     _ <- guard.acquire
     _ <- IO(inStream.close())
     _ <- guard.release

>     } yield ()

Author: If it's ok, I'd rather use `.handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)` here (in fact the tutorial code does that, the text is not aligned). I'll move the text explaining `handleErrorWith` here as well.

`attempt` is introduced in another example later on, where its output is actually used and so it's easier to explain (and to understand, I deem).

>     } yield ()

Author: I'm adding the mention to `withPermit`, it's quite handy :)

  }

def outputStream(f: File, guard: Semaphore[IO]): Resource[IO, FileOutputStream] =
  Resource.make {
    IO(new FileOutputStream(f))
  } { outStream =>
    for  {
     _ <- guard.acquire
     _ <- IO(outStream.close())
     _ <- guard.release
    } yield ()
  }

def inputOutputStreams(in: File, out: File, guard: Semaphore[IO]): Resource[IO, (InputStream, OutputStream)] =
  for {
    inStream  <- inputStream(in, guard)
    outStream <- outputStream(out, guard)
  } yield (inStream, outStream)

def copy(origin: File, destination: File)(implicit contextShift: ContextShift[IO]): IO[Long] = {
  for {
    guard <- Semaphore[IO](1)
    count <- inputOutputStreams(origin, destination, guard).use { case (in, out) => 

>                guard.acquire *> transfer(in, out).guarantee(guard.release)

Author: :+1: Thanks for the explanation! I hadn't realized about that possible error. I'm changing the code to use `.withPermit`.

             }
  } yield count
}
```

Before calling to `transfer` we acquire the semaphore, which is not released
until `transfer` is done. The `guarantee` call ensures that the semaphore will
be released under any circumstance, whatever the result of `transfer` (success,
error, or cancellation). As the 'release' parts in the `Resource` instances are
now blocked on the same semaphore, we can be sure that streams are closed only

> after `transfer` is over, _i.e._ we have implemented mutual exclusion of

Author: Running Ctrl-C when executing the final program closes the streams orderly so I assumed that cancellation was being properly controlled. But I guess that's because the Ctrl-C triggers the cancellation on the `IO` returned by  `.withPermit`, but not of the `transfer`. Good to know...

> after `transfer` is over, _i.e._ we have implemented mutual exclusion of

Reviewer 2: This sounds like something that should be mentioned in the text. People are _very_ likely to copy the sample code and try to use it, despite any disclaimers, so better warn them.

> after `transfer` is over, _i.e._ we have implemented mutual exclusion of

Author: Agreed. I'm adding this paragraph immediately after the text commented by @SystemFw :
```
Mark that while the `IO` returned by `copy` is cancelable (because so are `IO`
instances returned by `use`), the `IO` returned by `transfer` is not. Trying to
cancel it will not have any effect and that `IO` will run until the whole file
is copied! In real world code you will probably want to make your functions
cancelable, section [Building cancelable IO
tasks](../datatypes/io.html#building-cancelable-io-tasks) of `IO` documentation
explains how to create such cancelable `IO` instances.
```

`transfer` execution and resources releasing. The implicit `ContextShift`

> instance is required to create the semaphore instance; at this point you can

Reviewer 3: It's a basic inductive instance. 
In cats you have things like
```scala
implicit def optionMonoid[A: Monoid]: Monoid[Option[A]] = ???
```
(An Option of a monoid is a monoid).

In this case you have this in the companion of `IO`
```scala
implicit def concurrentIO(implicit ev: ContextShift[IO]): Concurrent[IO] = ???
```
so it's not like the context shift bring Concurrent in scope. `Concurrent[IO]` is always is scope, but it depends on having a ContextShift. This is needed because if you `start` with blocking code, you won't see concurrency unless you also `shift`, which wasn't nice for the users to think about (same for `race`, `parMap` and so on), so now it auto shifts, which requires some concepts of shifting, which is given by ContextShift (which is in turn backed by an EC, which is in turn backed by a thread pool).

If you stay polymorphic in `F[_]: Concurrent` and then use `IOApp`, this is not relevant from that  a practical and conceptual point of view: `Concurrent` gives you the ability to `start` (forking), and `IOApp` is the runtime system for `IO`, which provides all you need to have.

coding an effectful `main` method we code a pure `run` function. When executing
the class a `main` method defined in `IOApp` will call the `run` function we
have coded. Any interruption (like pressing `Ctrl-c`) will be treated as a
cancellation of the running `IO`. Also `IOApp` provides an implicit execution
context so it does not be imported/created by the code explicitely. When coding
`IOApp` instead of `main` we have a `run` function, which creates the `IO`
instance that forms the program. In our case, our `run` method can look like
this:

```scala
import cats.effect._
import cats.implicits._
import java.io.File

object Main extends IOApp {

  // copy as defined before
  def copy(origin: File, destination: File): IO[Long] = ???

  override def run(args: List[String]): IO[ExitCode] =
    for {
      _      <- if(args.length < 2) IO.raiseError(new IllegalArgumentException("Need origin and destination files"))
                else IO.unit
      orig = new File(args(0))
      dest = new File(args(1))
      count <- copy(orig, dest)
      _     <- IO(println(s"$count bytes copied from ${orig.getPath} to ${dest.getPath}"))
    } yield ExitCode.Success
}
```

> Heed how `run` verifies the `args` list passed. If there are less than two

Reviewer 4: Fewer than :)

side-effect is actually run until the `IO` returned by this method is evaluated.
With this in mind, code looks like:

```scala
import cats.effect._
import cats.implicits._
import java.io._
import java.net._

def echoProtocol(clientSocket: Socket): IO[Unit] = {

  def loop(reader: BufferedReader, writer: BufferedWriter): IO[Unit] = ???

  def reader(clientSocket: Socket): Resource[IO, BufferedReader] =
    Resource.make {
      IO( new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(clientSocket.getInputStream())) )
    } { reader =>
      IO(reader.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)
    }

  def writer(clientSocket: Socket): Resource[IO, BufferedWriter] =
    Resource.make {
      IO( new BufferedWriter(new PrintWriter(clientSocket.getOutputStream())) )
    } { writer =>
      IO(writer.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)
    }

  def readerWriter(clientSocket: Socket): Resource[IO, (BufferedReader, BufferedWriter)] =
    for {
      reader <- reader(clientSocket)
      writer <- writer(clientSocket)
    } yield (reader, writer)

  readerWriter(clientSocket).use { case (reader, writer) =>
    loop(reader, writer) // Let's get to work
  }

}
```

> Note that, as we did in the previous example, we ignore possible errors when

Reviewer 2: What's the difference?

```

The loop tries to read a line from the client, and if successful then it checks
the line content. If empty it finishes the method, if not it sends back the
line through the writer and loops back to the beginning. And what happens if we
find any error in the `reader.readLine()` call? Well, `IO` will catch the
exception and will short-circuit the evaluation, this method would then return
an `IO` instance carrying the caught exception. Easy, right :) ?

So we are done with our `echoProtocol` method, good! But we still miss the part
of our server that will list for new connections and create fibers to attend
them. Let's work on that, we implement that functionality in another method
that takes as input the `java.io.ServerSocket` instance that will listen for
clients:

```scala
import cats.effect.{ContextShift, IO}
import java.net.{ServerSocket, Socket}

// echoProtocol as defined before
def echoProtocol(clientSocket: Socket): IO[Unit] = ???

def serve(serverSocket: ServerSocket)(implicit contextShift: ContextShift[IO]): IO[Unit] = {
  def close(socket: Socket): IO[Unit] = 
    IO(socket.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)

  for {
    socket <- IO(serverSocket.accept())

>     _      <- echoProtocol(socket)

Author: I see. Sorry, I've been struggling a bit with this... I tried to use `Resource` but it either closed immediately the socket or I found an infinite loop.

Using `bracketCase` I get this:

```scala
    for {
      _ <- IO(serverSocket.accept())
             .bracketCase(socket => echoProtocol(socket).guarantee(close(socket)).start){ (socket, exit) => exit match {
               case Completed => IO.unit
               case Error(_) | Canceled => close(socket)
             }}
      _ <- serve(serverSocket)         // Looping back to the beginning
    } yield ()
```
? It works as expected and I _think_ it solves the interruption problem. But it would be great if you could confirm that point.

                .guarantee(close(socket)) // We close the socket whatever happens
                .start                    // Client attended by its own Fiber!
    _      <- serve(serverSocket)         // Looping back to the beginning
  } yield ()
}
```

To be honest, that wasn't that hard either, was it? We invoke the `accept()`
method of `ServerSocket` and when a new connection arrives we call the
`echoProtocol` method we defined above to attend it. As client socket instances
are created by this method, then it is in charge of closing them once
`echoProtocol` has finished. We do this with the quite handy `guarantee` call,
that ensures that when the `IO` finishes the functionality inside `guarantee`
is run whatever the outcome was. In this case we ensure closing the socket,
ignoring any possible error when closing. Also quite interesting: we use
`start`! By doing so the `echoProtocol` call will run on its own fiber thus
not blocking the main loop. The call to `start` we need an instance of

> `ContextShift`, which we pass to the method as an `implicit` parameter. As

Author: I'm changing the code to use `F[_]: Concurrent`.

// server must stop
def echoProtocol(clientSocket: Socket, stopFlag: MVar[IO, Unit]): IO[Unit] = ???

def serve(serverSocket: ServerSocket, stopFlag: MVar[IO, Unit])(implicit contextShift: ContextShift[IO]): IO[Unit] = {

  def close(socket: Socket): IO[Unit] = 
    IO(socket.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)

  for {
    socketE <- IO(serverSocket.accept()).attempt
    _       <- socketE match {
      case Right(socket) =>
        for { // accept() succeeded, we attend the client in its own Fiber
          _ <- echoProtocol(socket, stopFlag)
                 .guarantee(close(socket))   // We close the server whatever happens
                 .start                      // Client attended by its own Fiber
          _ <- serve(serverSocket, stopFlag) // Looping back to the beginning
        } yield ()
      case Left(e) =>
        for { // accept() failed, stopFlag will tell us whether this is a graceful shutdown
          isEmpty <- stopFlag.isEmpty
          _       <- if(!isEmpty) IO.unit    // stopFlag is set, nothing to do
                     else IO.raiseError(e)   // stopFlag not set, must raise error
        } yield ()
    }
  } yield ()

> }

Author: :+1:

                 case ""     => IO.unit          // Empty line, we are done
                 case _      => IO{ writer.write(line); writer.newLine(); writer.flush() } *> loop(reader, writer, stopFlag)
               }
               case Left(e) =>
                 for { // readLine() failed, stopFlag will tell us whether this is a graceful shutdown
                   isEmpty <- stopFlag.isEmpty
                   _       <- if(!isEmpty) IO.unit  // stopFlag is set, cool, we are done
                              else IO.raiseError(e) // stopFlag not set, must raise error
                 } yield ()
             }
  } yield ()
```

The [resulting server code is also
available](https://github.com/lrodero/cats-effect-tutorial/blob/master/src/main/scala/catsEffectTutorial/EchoServerV3_ClosingClientsOnShutdown).

### `Fiber`s are not threads!<a name="fibers-are-not-threads"></a>

As stated before, fibers are like 'light' threads, meaning they can be used in a
similar way than threads to create concurrent code. However, they are _not_
threads. Spawning new fibers does not guarantee that the action described in the

> `IO` associated to it will be run... immediately. At the end of the day, if no

Reviewer 3: > Spawning new fibers does not guarantee that the action described in the
 `IO` associated to it will be run... immediately

Note that the exact same thing is true of "real" threads as well

Author: I'm changing the text to _Spawning new fibers does not guarantee that the action described in the
`F` associated to it will be run if there is a shortage of threads._ . It conveys better what I'm trying to express.

be blocked until some thread is available.

You can test this yourself. Start the server defined in the previous sections
and try to connect several clients and send lines to the server through them.
Soon you will notice that the latest clients... do not get any echo reply when
sending lines! Why is that?  Well, the answer is that the first fibers already
used all _underlying_ threads available!  But if we close one of the active
clients by sending an empty line (recall that makes the server to close that
client session) then immediately one of the blocked clients will be active.

It shall be clear from that experiment that fibers are run by thread pools. And
that in our case, all our fibers share the same thread pool!  Which one in our
case? Well, `IOApp` automatically brings a `Timer[IO]`, that is defined by
cats-effect as a '_functional equivalente of Java's
[ScheduledExecutorService](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ScheduledExecutorService.html)_'.
Each executor service has an underlying thread pool to execute the commands it
is requested, and the same applies to `Timer`, which is in charge of assigning

> available threads to the pending `IO` actions. So there are our threads!

Reviewer 3: This is incorrect. This is the job of `ContextShift`, not `Timer`. `Timer` only schedules timed ticks.

Author: :disappointed: Sorry about that, I'm fixing the text.

Cats-effect provides ways to use different `scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext`s,
each one with its own thread pool, and to swap which one should be used for each
new `IO` to ask to reschedule threads among the current active `IO` instances
_e.g._ for improved fairness etc. Such functionality is provided by `IO.shift`.
Also, it even allows to 'swap' to different `Timer`s (that is, different thread

> pools) when running `IO` actions. See this code, which is mostly a copy example

Reviewer 3: Same mistake here, this is `ContextShift`

Author: Fixing the text accordingly.

available at [IO documentation in cats-effect web, Thread Shifting
section](https://typelevel.org/cats-effect/datatypes/io.html#thread-shifting):

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import java.util.concurrent.Executors
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

val cachedThreadPool = Executors.newCachedThreadPool()
val clientsExecutionContext = ExecutionContext.fromExecutor(cachedThreadPool)
implicit val contextShift = IO.contextShift(global) 

for {
  _ <- IO.shift(clientsExecutionContext) // Swapping to cached thread pool
  _ <- IO(???) // Whatever is done here, is done by a thread from the cached thread pool
  _ <- IO.shift // Swapping back to default thread pool
  _ <- IO(println(s"Welcome!")) 
} yield ()
```

`IO.shift` is a powerful tool but can be a bit confusing to beginners (and even

> intermediate) users of cats-effect. So do not worry if it takes some time for

Reviewer 3: This is slightly incorrect, but the confusion is very understandable. `IO.shift` is actually overloaded
```scala
 def shift(implicit cs: ContextShift[IO]): IO[Unit]
 def shift(ec: ExecutionContext): IO[Unit] 
```

And those two functions actually correspond to two different abstractions: one is `ContextShift.shift`, the other the `Async.shift` helper. Not sure how to fix this while being specialised to `IO` though, sorry :(

Reviewer 3: Actually, I think you should focus on `ContextShift.evalOn` here, rather than `shift`

Author: Code changed to use `ContextShift.evalOn`, with no specific mention to `IO`. Text also changed accordingly.

you to master.

#### Exercise: using a custom thread pool in echo server
Given what we know so far, how could we solve the problem of the limited number
of clients attended in parallel in our echo server? Recall that in traditional
servers we would make use of an specific thread pool for clients, able to resize
itself by creating new threads if they are needed. You can get such a pool using
`Executors.newCachedThreadPool()` as in the example of the previous section. But

> take care of shutting it down when the server is stopped!

Reviewer 3: Note that this is only really a significant problem because you are using blocking sockets. If you had a nonblocking version you could run it on whatever thread pool without needing a cached thread pool. Also note that using a `cachedThreadPool` with no application level limits (e.g. a `Semaphore`) is a great way to bring your application down by exhausting threads.

#### Solution
Well, the solution is quite straighforward. We only need to create a thread pool
and execution context, and use it whenever we need to read input from some
connected client. So the beginning of the `loop` function would look like:

```scala
for{
  _     <- IO.shift(clientsExecutionContext)
  lineE <- IO(reader.readLine()).attempt
  _     <- IO.shift(ExecutionContext.global)
  //

> ```

Reviewer 3: This idiom is no longer necessary. We have `ContextShift.evalOn` to run a computation on a given thread pool and have it return to the main one

Reviewer 3: Also note that if `lineE` was interruptible you wouldn't `shift` back, another reason to use `evalOn` which is properly bracketed

Author: Code and text is changed to use `ContextShift[F].evalOn`.

  val clientsThreadPool = Executors.newCachedThreadPool()
  implicit val clientsExecutionContext = ExecutionContext.fromExecutor(clientsThreadPool)

  for {
    stopFlag     <- MVar[IO].empty[Unit]
    serverFiber  <- serve(serverSocket, stopFlag).start
    _            <- stopFlag.read *> IO{println(s"Stopping server")}
    _            <- IO{clientsThreadPool.shutdown()}
    _            <- serverFiber.cancel
  } yield ExitCode.Success

}
```

Signatures of `serve` and of `echoProtocol` will have to be changed too to pass
the execution context as parameter. The [resulting server code is available
here](https://github.com/lrodero/cats-effect-tutorial/blob/master/src/main/scala/catsEffectTutorial/EchoServerV4_ClientThreadPool.scala).

## Let's not forget about `async`

The `async` functionality is another powerful capability of cats-effect we have
not mentioned yet. It allows to build `IO` instances that may be terminated by a
thread different than the one carrying the evaluation of that instance. Result
will be returned by using a callback.

Some of you may wonder if that could help us to solve the issue of having

> blocking code in our fabolous echo server. Unfortunately, `async` cannot

Reviewer 3: Ah, you did mention blocking here, apologies

[fs2](http://fs2.io) or [Monix](https://monix.io) to find powerful network and
file abstractions that integrate with cats-effect. But that is beyond the
purpose of this tutorial, which focuses solely on cats-effect.

That said, let's go!

## Setting things up

This [Github repo](https://github.com/lrodero/cats-effect-tutorial) includes all
the software that will be developed during this tutorial. It uses `sbt` as the
build tool. To ease coding, compiling and running the code snippets in this
tutorial it is recommended to use the same `build.sbt`, or at least one with the
same dependencies and compilation options:

```scala
name := "cats-effect-tutorial"

version := "1.0"

scalaVersion := "2.12.7"

libraryDependencies += "org.typelevel" %% "cats-effect" % "1.0.0" withSources() withJavadoc()

scalacOptions ++= Seq(
  "-feature",
  "-deprecation",
  "-unchecked",
  "-language:postfixOps",
  "-language:higherKinds",
  "-Ypartial-unification")
```

All code snippets in this tutorial can be pasted and compiled right in the scala
console of the project defined above (or any similar one).

## Copying contents of a file - safely handling resources

> Our goal is to create a program that copies files. So first we will work on a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our goal is to create a program that copies files. First we will work on a
```

function that carries such task, and then we will create a program that can be
invoked from the shell that uses that function.

> So first we must code the function that copies the content from a file to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First we must code the function that copies the content from a file to
```

another file. The function takes the source and destination files as parameters.
But this is functional programming! So invoking the function shall not copy
anything, instead it will return an `IO` instance that encapsulates all the
side-effects involved (opening/closing files, reading/writing content), that way
_purity_ is kept.  Only when that `IO` instance is evaluated all those
side-effectul actions will be run. In our implementation the `IO` instance will
return the amount of bytes copied upon execution, but this is just a design
decision. Of course errors can occur, but when working with any `IO` those
should be embedded in the `IO` instance. That is, no exception is raised outside
the `IO` and so no `try` (or the like) needs to be used when using the function,
instead the `IO` evaluation will fail and the `IO` instance will carry the error
raised.

Now, the signature of our function looks like this:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import java.io.File

def copy(origin: File, destination: File): IO[Long] = ???
```

Nothing scary, uh? As we said before, the function just returns an `IO`
instance. When run, all side-effects will be actually executed and the `IO`

> instance will return the bytes copies in a `Long` (note that`IO` is

Author: It should say _return the bytes copied_ instead. Fixing it...

  Resource.make {
    IO(new FileOutputStream(f))                         // build 
  } { outStream =>
    IO(outStream.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit) // release
  }

def inputOutputStreams(in: File, out: File): Resource[IO, (InputStream, OutputStream)] =
  for {
    inStream  <- inputStream(in)
    outStream <- outputStream(out)
  } yield (inStream, outStream)
```

We want to ensure that streams are closed once we are done using them, no matter
what. That is precisely why we use `Resource` in both `inputStream` and
`outputStream` functions, each one returning one `Resource` that encapsulates
the actions for opening and then closing each stream.  `inputOutputStreams`
encapsulates both resources in a single `Resource` instance that will be
available once the creation of both streams has been successful, and only in
that case. As seen in the code above `Resource` instances can be combined in
for-comprehensions as they implement `flatMap`. Note also that when releasing
resources we must also take care of any possible error during the release
itself, for example with the `handleErrorWith` call as we do in the code above.

> In this case we just 'swallow' the error, but normally it would be at least

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case we just 'swallow' the error, but normally it should be at least
```

Author: :+1:

import cats.effect.{IO, Resource}
import java.io.{File, FileInputStream}

def inputStream(f: File): Resource[IO, FileInputStream] =
  Resource.fromAutoCloseable(IO(new FileInputStream(f)))
```

That code is way simpler, but with that code we would not have control over what
would happen if the closing operation throws an exception. Also it could be that
we want to be aware when closing operations are being run, for example using
logs. In contrast, using `Resource.make` allows to easily control the actions
of the release phase.

Let's go back to our `copy` function, which now looks like this:

```scala
import cats.effect.{IO, Resource}
import java.io._

// as defined before
def inputOutputStreams(in: File, out: File): Resource[IO, (InputStream, OutputStream)] = ???

// transfer will do the real work
def transfer(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream): IO[Long] = ???

def copy(origin: File, destination: File): IO[Long] = 
  inputOutputStreams(origin, destination).use { case (in, out) => 
    transfer(in, out)
  }
```

The new method `transfer` will perform the actual copying of data, once the
resources (the streams) are obtained. When they are not needed anymore, whatever

> the outcome of `transfer` (it run successfully, there was an exception...) both

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the outcome of `transfer` (success or failure) both
```

Author: :+1:

then in the _usage_ stage we will copy the contents, and finally in the release
stage we will close the streams.  Thus we could define our `copy` function as
follows:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import cats.implicits._ 
import java.io._ 

// function inputOutputStreams not needed

// transfer will do the real work
def transfer(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream): IO[Long] = ???

def copy(origin: File, destination: File): IO[Long] = {
  val inIO: IO[InputStream]  = IO(new FileInputStream(origin))
  val outIO:IO[OutputStream] = IO(new FileOutputStream(destination))

  (inIO, outIO)              // Stage 1: Getting resources 
    .tupled                  // From (IO[InputStream], IO[OutputStream]) to IO[(InputStream, OutputStream)]
    .bracket{
      case (in, out) =>
        transfer(in, out)    // Stage 2: Using resources (for copying data, in this case)
    } {
      case (in, out) =>      // Stage 3: Freeing resources
        (IO(in.close()), IO(out.close()))
        .tupled              // From (IO[Unit], IO[Unit]) to IO[(Unit, Unit)]
        .handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit).void
    }
}
```

> New `copy` definition is more complex, still code as a whole is way shorter as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New `copy` definition is more complex, even though the code as a whole is way shorter as
```

Author: :+1:

iteration we increase the counter `acc` with the amount of bytes read at that
iteration. 

We are making progress, and already have a version of `copy` that can be used.
If any exception is raised when `transfer` is running, then the streams will be
automatically closed by `Resource`. But there is something else we have to take
into account: `IO` instances execution can be **_cancelled!_**. And cancellation
should not be ignored, as it is a key feature of cats-effect. We will discuss
cancellation in the next section.

### Dealing with cancellation
Cancellation is a powerful but non trivial cats-effect feature. In cats-effect,
some `IO` instances can be cancelable, meaning that their evaluation will be
aborted. If the programmer is careful, an alternative `IO` task will be run
under cancellation, for example to deal with potential cleaning up activities.
We will see how an `IO` can be actually cancelled at the end of the [Fibers are
not threads! section](#fibers-are-not-threads) later on, but for now we will
just keep in mind that during the execution of the `transfer` method a
cancellation can occur at any time.

> Now, `IO`s created with `Resource.use` can be cancelled. The cancellation will

Reviewer 2: You mention `Resource.use` here, but use `Resource.make` in the code, is that intended?

Reviewer 2: Ah wait, my bad. It was actually my lack of knowledge regarding `Resource` :)

Author: No prob :slightly_smiling_face:  !

def transfer(origin: InputStream, destination: OutputStream): IO[Long] = ???

def inputStream(f: File, guard: Semaphore[IO]): Resource[IO, FileInputStream] =
  Resource.make {
    IO(new FileInputStream(f))
  } { inStream => 
    guard.withPermit {
     IO(inStream.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)
    }
  }

def outputStream(f: File, guard: Semaphore[IO]): Resource[IO, FileOutputStream] =
  Resource.make {
    IO(new FileOutputStream(f))
  } { outStream =>
    guard.withPermit {
     IO(outStream.close()).handleErrorWith(_ => IO.unit)
    }
  }

def inputOutputStreams(in: File, out: File, guard: Semaphore[IO]): Resource[IO, (InputStream, OutputStream)] =
  for {
    inStream  <- inputStream(in, guard)
    outStream <- outputStream(out, guard)
  } yield (inStream, outStream)

def copy(origin: File, destination: File)(implicit concurrent: Concurrent[IO]): IO[Long] = {
  for {
    guard <- Semaphore[IO](1)
    count <- inputOutputStreams(origin, destination, guard).use { case (in, out) => 
               guard.withPermit(transfer(in, out))
             }
  } yield count
}
```

Before calling to `transfer` we acquire the semaphore, which is not released

> until `transfer` is done. The `guarantee` call ensures that the semaphore will

Reviewer 2: Mentioned _the `guarantee` call_ here can be a bit confusing, because you are only showing code actually exercising it way later.

> be released under any circumstance, whatever the result of `transfer` (success,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be released under any circumstances, whatever the result of `transfer` (success,
```

error, or cancellation). As the 'release' parts in the `Resource` instances are
now blocked on the same semaphore, we can be sure that streams are closed only
after `transfer` is over, _i.e._ we have implemented mutual exclusion of

> `transfer` execution and resources releasing. The implicit `Concurrent`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`transfer` execution and resources releasing. An implicit `Concurrent`
```

Author: That `The` is because it refers to the one in the signature method... but it is true readers cannot be aware of that. I'm changing the sentence to : _An implicit `Concurrent` instance
is required to create the semaphore instance, which is included in the function
signature._

instance is required to create the semaphore instance.

And that is it! We are done, now we can create a program that uses this
function.

### `IOApp` for our final program

We will create a program that copies files, this program only takes two
parameters: the name of the origin and destination files. For coding this
program we will use `IOApp` as it allows to maintain purity in our definitions
up to the main function.

`IOApp` is a kind of 'functional' equivalent to Scala's `App`, where instead of
coding an effectful `main` method we code a pure `run` function. When executing
the class a `main` method defined in `IOApp` will call the `run` function we
have coded. Any interruption (like pressing `Ctrl-c`) will be treated as a
cancellation of the running `IO`. Also `IOApp` provides implicit instances of
`Timer[IO]` and `ContextShift[IO]` (not discussed yet in this tutorial).
`ContextShift[IO]` allows for having a `Concurrent[IO]` in scope, as the one
required by the `copy` function.

> When coding `IOApp` instead of `main` we have a `run` function, which creates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When coding `IOApp`, instead of a `main` function, we have a `run` function, which creates
```

beginning to better understand the code listings shown in this tutorial.

Ok, we are ready to start coding our server. Let's build it step-by-step. First
we will code a method that implements the echo protocol. It will take as input
the socket (`java.net.Socket` instance) that is connected to the client. The
method will be basically a loop that at each iteration reads the input from the
client, if the input is not an empty line then the text is sent back to the
client, otherwise the method will finish.

The method signature will look like this:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import java.net.Socket
def echoProtocol(clientSocket: Socket): IO[Unit] = ???
```

Reading and writing will be done using `java.io.BufferedReader` and
`java.io.BufferedWriter` instances built from the socket. Recall that this
method will be in charge of closing those buffers, but not the client socket (it
did not create that socket after all!). We will use again `Resource` to ensure
that we close the streams we create. Also, all actions with potential
side-effects are encapsulated in `IO` instances. That way we ensure no
side-effect is actually run until the `IO` returned by this method is evaluated.

> With this in mind, code looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this in mind, the code looks like:
```

Author: :+1:

closing the streams, as there is little to do in such cases.

Of course, we still miss that `loop` method that will do the actual interactions
with the client. It is not hard to code though:

```scala
import cats.effect.IO
import cats.implicits._
import java.io._

def loop(reader: BufferedReader, writer: BufferedWriter): IO[Unit] =
  for {
    line <- IO(reader.readLine())
    _    <- line match {
              case "" => IO.unit // Empty line, we are done
              case _  => IO{ writer.write(line); writer.newLine(); writer.flush() } >> loop(reader, writer)
            }
  } yield ()
```

The loop tries to read a line from the client, and if successful then it checks
the line content. If empty it finishes the method, if not it sends back the
line through the writer and loops back to the beginning. And what happens if we
find any error in the `reader.readLine()` call? Well, `IO` will catch the
exception and will short-circuit the evaluation, this method would then return
an `IO` instance carrying the caught exception. Easy, right :) ?

So we are done with our `echoProtocol` method, good! But we still miss the part

> of our server that will list for new connections and create fibers to attend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of our server that will listen for new connections and create fibers to attend
```

Author: :+1:
